MUSIC
ACNE IS DIFFERENT NOW.
PERSONALLY IT'S BIGGER HIPS
I'M FAT.
ACNE'S DIFFERENT
CHALLENGE TO BOYS.
SHE WANTS TO
BE INDEPENDENT.
I LOST MY CHILDHOOD?
HELLO
HEY
RRRRH
WHAT MAKES TEENAGERS
SUCH AN EXTRAORDINARY
SPECIES?
OH GOD.
IN HUMAN TEENS, PUBERTY
HAPPENS LATER AND LASTS
LONGER THAN IN
ANY OTHER ANIMAL.
AS THEY TURN FROM CHILD TO
ADULT AMAZING THINGS GO ON
IN THE BODY AND THE MIND.
AND WE EXPLORE THOSE
CHANGES IN REMARKABLE
SCIENTIFIC DETAIL.
BLLHHH
TEENAGERS HAVE TALKED
TO US WITH UNPARALLELED
FRANKNESS AND INTIMACY.
NO COMMENT.
TONIGHT WE
EXAMINE THE GIRLS.
SPOTS AND ALL.
MUSIC
WE FILMED FIVE
VOLUNTEERS BETWEEN THE
AGES OF 11 AND 16.
OUR OLDEST SHARMAINE
HAS A PROBLEM.
FIRST I GOT
SHOUTED AT
TONIGHT I GOT SHOUTED AT
WHY ARE TEENAGE GIRLS
SO DIFFICULT TO LIVE WITH?
HOW DO I KNOW WHEN
YOUR TELLING THE TRUTH?
I DON'T KNOW.
YOU SHOULD BELIEVE ME.
CLAUDIA'S DANCING
CAREER IS UNDER THREAT.
FROM HER BODY.
WELL THAT'S MY BABES...
ALEX FACES THE HORRORS OF
DEVELOPING YEARS AHEAD OF
HER TIME.
AND IDENTICAL TWINS,
REBECCA AND JESSICA SIMPLY
DREAD THE FUTURE.
BUT I DON'T WANT
TO GROW UP BECAUSE,
IT'S BETTER TO BE A KID.
LAUGHTER
BUT WILL THEIR IDENTICAL
GENES SHAPE THEIR ATTITUDES
AS WELL AS THEIR BIOLOGY?
HOW SIMILAR WILL THEY BE
WHEN THEY TURN THIRTEEN?
WE STAY WITH
ALL OUR GIRLS,
FOR TWO YEARS AS THEY GO
THROUGH THE MOST CRUCIAL
STAGES OF THEIR LIVES.
YEAH
MUSIC
FIRST OUR YOUNGEST.
REBECCA AND JESSICA
ARE JUST 11-YEARS-OLD.
I'M REBECCA.
AND I'M JESSICA.
SHE DOES SCREAM A LOT.
IT'S NOT THAT SHE'S
THE SAME AGE AS ME.
THESE ARE ME AND
MY SISTERS FISH.
THESE ARE MY SISTERS
TOYS AND THAT'S MY SISTER
THIS IS MY NANNY.
THIS IS INTERVIEWING
MY NANNY.
HELLO
WHAT IS IT LIKE
WITH GRANDCHILDREN?
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN MORE
HELPFUL IF YOU HAD BEEN
LESS IDENTICAL, CAUSE
I CAN'T TELL YOU APART.
MUSIC
REBECCA ON THE RIGHT,
IS JUST TWO MINUTES OLDER
THAN HER SISTER JESSICA.
BEING IDENTICAL TWINS
MEANS MORE THAN JUST
LOOKING ALIKE.
THE GIRLS LEARN TO WALK
AND TALK AT THE SAME TIME
AS EACH OTHER.
AT 11, THEY SHARE
INTERESTS AND FRIENDS.
THEY HAVE NOT YET
STARTED PUBERTY.
BUT THEY HAVE A PRETTY
GOOD IDEA OF WHAT'S
COMING.
WELP, FIRST OF ALL WE GET
BIGGER HIPS AND YOU GET
TALLER AND YOU GET MUCH
STRONGER, AND WHAT ELSE.
AND THEN YOU GET, KIND
OF LIKE, WHICH I'M NOT GOING
TO GET, FOR A WHILE.
LAUGHTER
CLOSE YOUR EYES.
WOULD YOU
STOP BLINKING.
EVEN THOUGH THEY HAVE
NOT STARTED TO DEVELOP.
THE TWINS ARE DRESSING TO
THE NINES FOR TONIGHT'S
LEAVER'S DISCO FOR
THEIR PRIMARY SCHOOL.
(MUSIC)
ARE WE READY?
OH YES.
IT TAKES FOUR YEARS
FOR A GIRL TO BE FULLY
TRANSFORMED INTO AN ADULT.
IT CAN START ANYTIME
BETWEEN 8 AND 13.
BUT UNLIKE THE TWINS, MOST
11 YEAR OLDS DO SHOW SOME
SIGNS.
SOME OF THE GIRLS, LIKE
HAVE BOYFRIENDS AND STUFF
AND THEY REALLY, THEY WANT
TO BE GROWN-UPS REALLY FAST.
THEY DON'T REALLY GOT
A GOOD SENSE OF HUMOR,
BUT THEY HAVE.
THEY DON'T REALLY
PLAY LIKE SILLY GAMES.
(MUSIC)
PUBERTY IS DRIVEN BY
A CRUCIAL COCKTAIL OF
HORMONES.
GROWTH HORMONES.
CORTISOL, ESTROGEN
AND PROGESTERONE.
THEY MAKE
BEAUTIFUL CRYSTALS,
BUT NORMALLY THEIR
DISSOLVED IN THE BLOOD.
MUSIC
A FEW MONTHS
AFTER THE DISCO.
UN-BE NOTICED TO THE TWINS,
THEIR HORMONES ARE FORCING
THEIR BODIES TO CHANGE.
IT HAPPENS AT NIGHT.
MUSIC
AN HOUR AFTER THE
GIRLS FALL ASLEEP,
THEIR BRAINS GO TO WORK.
MUSIC
HORMONES TRAVEL DOWN
THE BLOOD VESSELS TO THE
OVARIES WHICH START
PULSING ESTROGEN INTO THE
BLOOD STREAM.
MUSIC
THE CASCADE OF
PUBERTY HAS BEGUN.
MUSIC
AT FIRST, SMALL DOSES
OF ESTROGEN ARE RELEASED
EVERY 90 MINUTES.
OVER THE NEXT FEW WEEKS,
THE PULSES GET LONGER AND
MORE FREQUENT.
UNTIL THERE IS A CONTINUOUS
STREAM OF ESTROGEN IN THE
BLOOD.
THIS TRIGGERS A CHANGE,
THAT GIRLS THEMSELVES
FIRST NOTICE.
MY FRIEND, NAN.
UM, SHE'S GOTTEN BIGGER.
AND, AND SHE LOOKS
FLUFFY IN ALL THESE TOPS.
BECAUSE IT GOES LIKE THIS.
(LAUGHTER)
AND, AND SHE
LOOKS REALLY NICE,
BUT WHEN YOU GOT A
FLAT CHEST, LIKE ME,
IT DOESN'T
REALLY LOOK NICE.
MUSIC
HUMANS ARE THE ONLY
SPECIES THAT DEVELOP
BREASTS BEFORE
THEY GET PREGNANT.
BREASTS FIRST BECOME
VISIBLE AS MILK DUCKS GROW
BEHIND THE NIPPLE.
THEN FAT COLLECTS AROUND
THE MILK DUCTS AND AROUND
THE NIPPLE ITSELF.
BENEATH THE DARK
CIRCLE OF THE AREOLA,
SWEAT GLANDS AND
SCENT GLANDS DEVELOP.
MUSIC
USUALLY BREASTS
COME FIRST.
THE WAR HAPPENS WHEN
THINGS DON'T GO ACCORDING
TO PLAN.
ALEX IS 10 YEARS OLD.
THREE YEARS AGO
WHEN SHE WAS JUST 7,
SOMETHING
FRIGHTENING HAPPENED.
MUSIC
COME ON ALEX, GO!
GO ALEX!
MOOD CHANGES WERE
THE FIRST THING.
THEN TEMPER TANTRUMS
BECAME LIKE IRATE
TEMPER TANTRUMS.
I DIDN'T WANT TO
GET NEAR MY MOM AT ALL.
AND I WOULD GET MAD
AT HER FOR NOTHING.
HER MOODS WERE, JUST ANY
GIVEN POINT WERE OFF THE
WALL.
MUSIC
KATHY WAS WORRIED THAT
HER LITTLE GIRL WAS
MENTALLY ILL.
I REMEMBER JUST
FRETTING AND MY HUSBAND
FRETTING, WHAT
COULD BE THE PROBLEM.
UH, CAN SHE BE THIS
UNHAPPY AND HOW CAN A
CHILD WHO WAS SO HAPPY
3 MONTHS AGO BE SO SAD.
MUSIC
ALEX HAD BEEN ADOPTED BY
KATHY AND HER HUSBAND WHEN
SHE WAS 5.
SHE SPENT HER EARLY YEARS
IN A ROMANIAN ORPHANAGE.
COULD THIS STILL BE
AFFECTING HER MIND?
MUSIC
KATHY WAS ANXIOUS AND
TOOK ALEX TO SEE A DOCTOR.
BUT HE DIDN'T OFFER
THERAPY OR MEDICATION.
INSTEAD, HE TOOK AN
X-RAY OF ALEX'S HAND.
THIS IS THE X-RAY
OF A 2 YEAR OLD.
THE GAPS BETWEEN
THE BONES ARE WIDE.
THEY LOOK DARK BECAUSE
THEY ARE FILLED WITH
CARTILAGE WHICH DOES
NOT SHOW UP ON X-RAYS.
IT'S ALSO WHAT MAKES
YOUNG HANDS FEEL FLOPPY.
AS THE HAND GROWS TO ADULT
SIZE, THE GAPS NARROW.
THIS IS ALEX'S X-RAY.
AT 7 YEARS OLD, SHE HAD
THE HANDS OF A TEENAGER.
AND THE REST OF HER
BODY WAS NOT FAR BEHIND.
BY THE TIME HER BONE
SCAN WAS COMPLETED,
SHE AT THAT POINT HAD
HAD COMPLETE NIPPLE
DEVELOPMENT.
SHE WAS SO ODD LOOKING, BY
COMPARISON TO SOME OF THE
OTHER GIRLS.
MY CHEST WAS BIGGER.
IT'S JUST THAT YOU
LOOK DIFFERENT,
AND YOUR TALLER.
YOU JUST DON'T BLEND IN
WITH THE OTHER GIRLS.
I DID MIND A LOT BECAUSE
I SMELLED MORE STINKY.
AND LIKE BECAUSE I
WAS SWEATING A LOT,
SO I WOULD HAVE TO TAKE
MORE SHOWERS, AND PUT, UM,
DEODORANT ON ME.
WHICH WAS REALLY VERY
INTERESTING BECAUSE AT 7
THEIR REALLY RESISTANT
TO WEARING DEODORANT.
"I DON'T NEED THIS."
OH, YES YOU DO.
DOES IT MATTER IF
A GIRL DEVELOPS YEARS
EARLIER THAN HER FRIENDS.
PSYCHOLOGIST JEAN
BROOKS-GUNN THINKS IT DOES.
THIS CHILD STANDS OUT
IN STARK CONTRAST TO
EVERYBODY ELSE.
IT RELATES TO
SELF-CONSCIENCENESS
THAT THE
GIRLS MIGHT HAVE.
IT RELATES TO NEGATIVE
FEELINGS ABOUT BODY IMAGE.
GIRLS WHO ARE EARLY MIGHT
ALSO SHOW DEPRESSIVE
SYMPTOMS, BECAUSE OF
THE FACT THAT THERE IS A
DIFFERENCE.
BEING DIFFERENT,
IS DIFFICULT.
WHAT PARENTS AND TEACHERS
MAY DO IF THEY SEE A GIRL
DEVELOPING EARLY IS TO
THINK THAT THAT GIRL IS
MORE ADVANCED EMOTIONALLY
THAN SHE REALLY IS.
PARENTS MAY START GIVING
HER FREEDOM AS THOUGH SHE
IS MATURE, BUT THE
IMPORTANT FACT IS,
IS THE PHYSICAL
DEVELOPMENT AND EMOTIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ARE NOT LINKED.
EARLY DEVELOPERS DO
NOT HAVE THE EXPERIENCE TO
COPE WITH PUBERTY.
AND THE RESULTS
CAN BE TRAGIC.
THROUGHOUT THEIR LIVES,
THEY ARE 3 TIMES AS LIKELY
TO SUFFER FROM AN
EATING DISORDER,
TWICE AS LIKELY
TO TAKE DRUGS,
AND TWICE AS LIKELY
TO ATTEMPT SUICIDE.
AS GIRLS WHO
DEVELOP LATER.
ALEX'S PARENTS DID NOT
WANT THEIR 7 YEAR OLD TO
GROW UP SO FAST.
WE KNEW THAT SHE HAD BEEN
RAISED IN AN INSTITUTION
AND SHE HAD NO CHILDHOOD.
SO THIS WAS ONLY TWO IN
A HALF YEARS OF CHILDHOOD
FOR HER.
AND WE REALLY FELT THAT
SHE WAS GETTING ROBBED.
ALEX WAS GIVEN MEDICAL
TREATMENT TO REVERSE THE
EFFECTS OF THE HORMONES.
HER BREASTS DISAPPEARED.
HER MOODS RETURNED
TO NORMAL.
SHE BECAME A CHILD AGAIN.
BUT WHY DID SHE
START SO EARLY?
TIMING DEPENDS ON BOTH,
WHAT GIRLS ARE BORN WITH,
THEIR GENES AND THE
WORLD THEY LIVE IN.
RACE CAN MAKE
A DIFFERENCE.
BLACK GIRLS GENERALLY
DEVELOP EARLIER THAN WHITE
GIRLS.
NO ONE STUDY ROMANIANS.
FOR ALEX, IT WAS
PROBABLY SOMETHING ELSE.
GIRLS WITH A STABLE FAMILY
LIFE TEND TO DEVELOP LATER
THAN AVERAGE.
AND STRESSED CHILDREN
DEVELOP EARLIER.
SO THE YEARS ALEX SPENT
IN THE ROMANIAN ORPHANAGE
MIGHT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
HER EARLY DEVELOPMENT.
BUT NORMALLY, THE MOST
IMPORTANT FACTOR, IS FAT.
IT'S JUST BEEN DISCOVERED
THAT FAT HAS AN
EXTRAORDINARY
IMPACT ON PUBERTY.
THESE LITTLE
ROUND FAT CELLS,
SCATTERED THROUGHOUT THE
BODY DO SOMETHING AMAZING.
THEY CONTINUOUSLY RELEASE
A HORMONE INTO THE BLOOD
STREAM, THATSEEM
DIRECTLY TO THE BRAIN.
THE BRAIN WILL NOT SET
PUBERTY GOING UNTIL IT
DETECTS THAT THERE IS
ENOUGH FAT ON BOARD TO
FUEL THE TEENAGE
GROWTH SPURTS.
CHILDREN ARE MUCH FATTER
THAN WHAT THEY USED TO BE.
ALMOST A QUARTER
ARE OVER WEIGHT.
AND THIS IS DRIVING
PUBERTY BACK.
TODAY, MANY GIRLS START
DEVELOPING BREASTS WHEN
THEIR JUST 9 YEARS OLD.
BUT NOT THE TWINS.
IT'S SEPTEMBER 2000.
HELLO, UM
I AM WITHOUT BREASTS.
HELLO,
UM, TOMORROW IS
OUR FIRST DAY
OF SECONDARY SCHOOL
AND UM, I'M REALLY
SCARED ABOUT IT.
TOMORROW IS OUR FIRST
DAY OF SECONDARY SCHOOL
AND WE ARE REALLY, REALLY,
REALLY, REALLY, REALLY,
REALLY, REALLY SCARED.
I'M EXCITED BECAUSE I'M
MAKING AN EARLY START,
AND THAT'S MY
MOM BEHIND ME.
HELLO
I DON'T KNOW
ANYONE THERE.
BUT WE DON'T HAVE A
SCHOOL ON THE DAY,
WHEN PEOPLE WENT.
STOP IT JESSICA!
MUSIC
THE TWINS ARE ON
THEIR WAY TO THE BIGGEST
SECONDARY SCHOOL
IN LONDON.
TWO THOUSAND STUDENTS
COME HERE EVERYDAY.
STARTING SENIOR SCHOOL IS
A SCARY PROSPECT FOR ANY
11 YEAR OLD.
BUT FOR THE TWINS IT'S
GOING TO BE EVEN HARDER.
THEY HAD ONLY SPENT
BUT A FEW DAYS APART.
WE ARE GOING TO BE IN
DIFFERENT CLASSES AND SHE
IS GOING TO BE IN ONE
CLASS AND I AM GOING TO BE
IN ANOTHER.
AND WE ARE GOING TO HAVE
DIFFERENT TEACHERS BUT WE
WILL SEE EACH
OTHER AT PLAYTIMES.
BUT WILL WE SEE EACH
OTHER AT PLAYTIMES?
OF COURSE, DUH.
AND AT LUNCH TIME.
THERE'S ANOTHER WORRY
THAT THE TWINS SHARE WITH
MANY CHILDREN HERE TODAY.
IT'S BEEN PREYING ON
THEIR MINDS FOR MONTHS.
THEY MIGHT, UM,
FORCE ME TO SMOKE AND
THEY MIGHT BULLY ME.
AND WHAT
IF I HAVE TO,
THEY MIGHT BEAT ME UP.
I THINK BULLYING IS A
MASSIVE ISSUE FOR TEENAGERS.
ALMOST EVERYONE IN
THEIR SCHOOL TIME,
SUFFERS BULLYING
AT SOME STAGE OR
IS VERY AWARE OF IT.
IT HAPPENS TO
SOMEONE CLOSE BY.
CHARLIE REDMAN RUNS
BRITAIN'S MOST POPULAR
WEB SITE FOR TEENAGE GIRLS.
EVERY MONTH 300,000
OF THEM LOG ON.
THE WEB SITE RUNS FEATURES
ON ENTERTAINMENT AND FUN.
THAT IS WHAT HE THOUGHT
GIRLS WOULD BE INTERESTED IN.
WHEN HE POSTED A
SURVEY ON BULLYING,
HE WAS IN FOR A SURPRISE.
NORMALLY WITH OUR SERVICE
WE GIVE AWAY A PRIZE.
THIS TIME WE WEREN'T
GIVING AWAY A PRIZE AND IT
WAS ABOUT A SERIOUS ISSUE.
WE GOT JUST OVER 1300
ANSWERS TO THE SURVEY IN A
TWO-DAY PERIOD.
SO I THINK WHAT THAT
SHOWED WAS THAT SOMETHING
THAT WAS A LOT OF TEENAGE
GIRLS USE THE WEB SITE FELT
VERY STRONGLY ABOUT IT
THE ANONYMITY OF
CYBERSPACE REVEALED LEVELS
OF BULLYING AMONG GIRLS,
NEVER BEFORE SUSPECTED.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF
BULLYING THAT TAKES PLACE
IS MENTAL BULLYING.
MENTAL ABUSE AND TEASING,
GANGING UP ON HIM OR HER.
AND ALL TEENAGERS ARE
DESPERATE TO FIT IN,
TO BE ACCEPTED.
UM, AND YOU KNOW BULLYING
REALLY IS GOING AGAINST
MUSIC
ACROSS THE UK ONE IN
TEN STUDENTS IN SECONDARY
SCHOOL GET BULLIED
AT LEAST ONCE A WEEK.
AND EACH YEAR, AT LEAST
15 BULLIED TEENAGERS KILL
THEMSELVES.
THE CONCERN I THINK
THAT WE HAD WAS THAT 70%
OF IT WAS NEVER REPORTED
TO EITHER PARENTS OR
INDEED TO TEACHERS.
UM, SO WHILE IT
IS A HUGE ISSUE,
IT'S NOT NECESSARILY ONE
THAT THAT THE TEACHERS
KNOW THE EXTENT OF.
MUSIC
MOM, I'M NOT GOING TO BE
THE ONLY GIRL IN MY CLASS.
MOM, CAN YOU TAKE THIS
IF WE CAN ALL
LISTEN VERY CAREFULLY,
FOR JUST A MOMENT.
WE ARE GOING TO LINE YOU
UP AND CHOOSE THE GROUPS
AND THEN IN A COUPLE OF
MINUTES YOUR TUTORS WILL
BE TAKING YOU IN...
ONE OF THE BEST WAYS TO
AVOID BEING BULLIED IS TO
FIT IN.
FASHION IS VITALLY
IMPORTANT TO TEENAGERS.
MUSIC
THE WEB SITE UPDATES
ITS PAGES EVERYDAY.
SO IS TO STAY RIGHT ON
TOP OF TEEN CULTURE,
WHATEVER THAT IS.
IT IS HARD TO
DEFINE TEEN CULTURE.
TEEN CULTURE CHANGES,
FROM DAY TO DAY.
UM, IT IS ENORMOUSLY
TRANSPOSING AND WHAT WE
TRY TO DO AS A SITE IS GET
FEEDBACK FROM TEENAGERS.
WHAT IS INTERESTING
TO THEM?
THEY DO THIS BY RUNNING
REGULAR FOCUS GROUPS.
THIS IS BASICALLY A
WEB SITE FOR TEENAGE GIRLS.
THE WEB SITE MAKES ITS
MONEY BY ADVERTISING
FASHION AND BEAUTY
PRODUCTS AIMED AT TEENAGE
GIRLS.
AND TEENAGE GIRLS
CAN BE BIG SPENDERS.
IN AN AVERAGE MONTH,
WHAT DO YOU TYPICALLY
SPEND ON CLOTHES?
PROBABLY, UM, PROBABLY
ABOUT $250 TO $300.
(LAUGHTER)
IN THE YEAR 2000 TEENAGE
SPENDING IN THE UK WAS
WORTH $20 BILLION SO ALL
THAT SHOWS IS THAT THEY
HAVE A VERY HIGH
DISPOSABLE INCOME AND THE
ONE THING WITH TEENAGERS
IS THEY DISPOSE OF IT TOO.
OF THAT 20 BILLION, GIRLS
SPEND 7 MILLION POUNDS ON
LIPSTICK, 46 MILLION ON
PERFUME AND 185 MILLION
POUNDS ON CD'S.
IT ANNOYING WHEN YOUR
KISSING PEOPLE HELLO.
OR JUST KISSING
PEOPLE IN GENERAL.
CLAUDIA IS 14, WE FIRST
MET HER 2 YEARS AGO,
WHEN SHE WAS JUST 12.
HEY WELCOME TO TEENAGE
SPECIES, I'M CLAUDIA.
I GO TO ARTS EDUCATION
SCHOOL AND TRAINING.
I'M HERE TO DO A
DOCUMENTARY AND A
VIDEO DIARY ON ME
WELL HERE I AM.
HEY.
MUSIC
I LIKE BEING A
TEENAGER IT'S FUN.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO
BE RESPONSIBLE.
I DON'T KNOW-- YOU
CAN JUST HAVE MORE FUN.
IT'S LIKE WHEN
I GO SHOPPING,
I DON'T HAVE TO RELY
ON A JOB FOR THE MONEY.
I CAN JUST SPEAK TO MY MOM
AND BE LIKE COME ON AND
JUST LITTLE THINGS LIKE
THAT, IT'S JUST BETTER.
BUT A, WHEN
YOU'RE A TEENAGER,
ONCE IT'S FINISHED
YOUR NOT GONNA HAVE IT
EVER AGAIN.
SO YOU MIGHT AS
WELL JUST ENJOY IT.
AND THAT'S HOW I
THINK ABOUT IT ANYWAY.
BUT DESPITE
APPEARANCES,
CLAUDIA IS IN TROUBLE.
MUSIC
CLAUDIA IS A DANCER AND
SHE IS VERY AMBITIOUS.
YOU JUST GET SO EXCITED.
I JUST LOVE PERFORMING,
I REALLY, REALLY LOVE,
I'M JUST SO PASSION,
I REALLY LOVE ACTING,
SINGING AND DANCING.
IT'S EVERYTHING TO ME.
I REALLY, REALLY
LOVE TO PERFORM.
UNFORTUNATELY,
CLAUDIA HAS LOST CONTROL
OF HER BODY.
TRY AND HOLD ON
TO YOUR CENTER.
I KNOW IT'S ALRIGHT.
AND ALL THE WAY UP.
ALRIGHT, NOTICE HOW YOUR
BODY WANTS TO STAY TO FAR
BACKWARDS, SO I THINK IF
TIGHTENING YOUR BELLY,
LINING UP OVER YOUR
KNEE AND OVER YOUR FOOT.
SO BRING THE MIDDLE OF
YOU OVER TO YOUR FOOT,
SO YOU PROBABLY NEED
TO COME FORWARD.
EVERYTHING IS WRONG AND
EVERYTHING IN MY BODY
IS WRONG.
IT'S REALLY BAD BECAUSE
YOU FEEL LIKE YOUR TRYING
SO HARD AND EVERYTHING YOU
TRY, JUST DOESN'T WORK.
CLAUDIA HAS DANCED
SERIOUSLY SINCE SHE WAS 3
YEARS OLD.
FOR THE PAST 6 YEARS SHE
HAS A ATTENDED A THEATER
ART SCHOOL IN
HARTFORDSHIRE.
WE HAVE STEP
BALL CHANGE
SHE SPENDS 30 HOURS
A WEEK IN TRAINING.
PLIÉ FROM THERE
NOW THE TROUBLE
IS SHE'S GROWING.
CIRCULAR SPREAD.
MUSIC
DURING PUBERTY, THE
SKELETON GROWS IN A SET
ORDER.
HANDS AND FEET GROW FIRST.
THEN THE FOREARM AND SHIN.
AND THEN THE UPPER
ARM AND THIGH.
THE LEGS USUALLY START
WHEN A GIRL STARTS HER
PERIODS.
BUT THE SPINE CONTINUES TO
GROW UNTIL SHE REACHES HER
FULL ADULT HEIGHT.
AT ABOUT 14 YEARS OLD.
YOU MUST BE NICE AND
STRAIGHT WITH YOUR BACK.
HOW TALL AM I?
5 FOOT
5 AND A HALF.
THAT'S 1 AND A HALF
INCHES SINCE SEPTEMBER.
AT 12 CLAUDIA
IS AVERAGE HEIGHT.
BUT SHE SHOT UP 6 ½
INCHES THAT'S ABOUT 17
CENTIMETERS IN
THE PAST YEAR.
LOW, THAT'S LOW.
GROWING SO FAST, IT'S
NO WONDER SHE'S LOSING HER
BALANCE.
MUSIC
YOUR BALANCE GOES
COMPLETELY AWAY.
I KNOW, IT'S ALRIGHT.
MUSIC
THE EXTRAORDINARY
GROWTH OF ADOLESCENCE IS
ONLY POSSIBLE BECAUSE OF
CELLS CALLED OSTEOCLASTS.
THEY ARE UNIQUE BECAUSE
THEIR DESIGNED TO DESTROY.
FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER,
WE FILMED TINY OSTEOCLASTS
MERGING INTO MASSIVE NEW
CELLS THAT MAKE ACID.
YOU CAN SEE IT HAPPENING
AT THE RIGHT OF THE
SCREEN.
THE ACID FACTORIES
SCULPTED THE BONES INTO
SHAPE, BY PUMPING ACID
ONTO THE SURFACE AND
DISSOLVING THEM AWAY.
IF IT WERE NOT
FOR OSTEOCLASTS,
WE SIMPLY WOULD NOT
END UP THE RIGHT SHAPE.
TWELVE YEAR OLD GIRLS
CAN BE AS MUCH AS 40
CENTIMETERS
DIFFERENT IN HEIGHT.
CLAUDIA IS ONE OF THE
TALLEST IN HER YEAR.
SHE USED TO LIKE THE
IDEA OF BEING TALL AND
WILLOWY.
BUT NOW SHE IS,
IT'S NOT MUCH FUN.
IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT
WHEN YOU'RE THE BIGGEST
ONE OR THE TALLEST ONE,
OR SOMETHING DIFFERENT
COMPARED TO EVERYONE ELSE.
ESPECIALLY TODAY
WITH JARED,
BECAUSE SHE IS SO SMALL
AND PETITE AND SHE CAN GET
HER LEGS AND DO THE SPLITS
EASILY AND EVERYTHING.
AND IF YOU LOOK IN THE
MIRROR AND SHE'S STANDING
NEXT TO YOU, YOU'RE A BIT
OF A MONSTER COMPARED TO
HER.
LAUGHTER
AND THERE'S
ANOTHER PROBLEM.
DURING THE GROWTH SPURT,
BONES GROW FASTER,
THAN MUSCLES.
MUSCLES LAG WELL BEHIND.
CLAUDIA HAS GOT
LOVELY LONG LEGS,
BUT AT THE MOMENT NO
MUSCLE STRENGTH TO CONTROL
HER LEGS.
THEY CAN GROW UP TO
A PHENOMENAL RATE,
ABOUT A CENTIMETER
A MONTH.
WHICH MEANS THAT ONCE THEY
HAVE THESE LONG LEGS THEY
DON'T HAVE THE MUSCLES
TO CONTROL THEM.
AND REST, A MOMENT,
CLAUDIA CAN YOU CONNECT A
SECOND.
AT THE MOMENT
CLAUDIA'S GOT ENOUGH
STRENGTH
TO HOLD IT THERE.
ALRIGHT, TAKE YOUR TIME.
CLAUDIA IS REALLY QUIT
FLEXIBLE AND WHEN SHE'S
OLDER AND STRONGER SHE
WILL BE ABLE TO HOLD HER
LEG UP THERE QUIT SOON.
AS SOON AS THE MUSCLE HAS
CAUGHT UP TO THE LEGS SHE
WILL BE ABLE TO HOLD HER
LEG UP ALL BY HERSELF.
WON'T THAT BE FUN.
ALRIGHT, LET'S START IT
AGAIN WITH THE MUSIC.
READY, THANK YOU.
PROPER.
MUSIC
AND ONE.
THEY HAVE THESE
TREMENDOUS HORMONAL RUSHES
AS EVERY PARENT OF A
TEENAGER WILL KNOW AND THE
DANGER HERE IS THAT
PREVIOUSLY STRONG
CONFIDENT CHILD CAN LOSE
THEIR SELF-ESTEEM AND LOSE
THEIR CONFIDENCE AS THEY
PERCEIVE THEIR LACK OF
STRENGTH TO BE DECREASE
IN ABILITY AND IN TALENT.
IT'S REALLY BAD BECAUSE
I WANT TO BE BETTER AND I
WANT IT TO ALL
HAPPEN SO QUICKLY.
BUT, UNFORTUNATELY IT
DOESN'T SO I GOT TO WAIT.
INSECURITY IS
TYPICAL TEENAGE TERRITORY,
BUT IT'S NOT THE ONLY
EMOTION RESPONSE TO
SURGING HORMONES.
TODAY IS SATURDAY, THE
15 OF JULY AND I'M GETTING
READY TO GO TO
MY COUSINS PARTY.
AND I'VE BEEN
KIND OF EXCITED,
I CAN'T BELIEVE IT REALLY.
YOU KNOW THE THOUGHT
OF IT, IT JUST LOOKS,
YOU KNOW GREAT, FOR I
WORE A BLACK TOP HERE.
AND IT WAS A BIT LONG.
I WANTED MY MOM
TO STOP SHOUTING.
SHARMAINE THIS
IN WITH HER MOTHER,
TWO SISTERS AND
HER BROTHER.
NOT PEDDLE PUSHERS.
WELL LOOK
SHARMAINE IS 14.
PHYSICALLY SHE'S
ALMOST FULLY DEVELOPED.
BUT HER FAMILY ARE NOT
SO SURE ABOUT THE REST.
I GOT ENOUGH ANYWAY.
SHARMAINE IS
A COMPLETE PEST.
SHE'S A PEST.
YEAH, I THINK I'M
A PEST, BECAUSE
I'LL DO IT ON
PEOPLES NERVES.
I'LL GET ON SAM'S NERVES.
SHE JUST THINKS SHE'S
NEAT AND SHE'S JUST NOT.
WHAT I DO ON PURPOSE,
I DON'T REALLY.
SOMETIMES I DO TO SAM.
SHE TRY'S TO GET ME IN
TROUBLE. BUT I DON'T
BELIEVE HER BECAUSE
SHE TELLS LIES.
OBVIOUSLY, I'M
A PEST TO STEPHANIE.
SHE GETS
ON MY NERVES.
SHE GETS UPSET.
I CAN'T STAND HER.
I'M NOT THAT REALLY
A PEST TO LOX'S.
SHE GETS
ONTO ME.
NAH, NOT TO LOX'S.
I THINK SHE'S
SCARED OF ME.
SHARMAINE DO
YOU LIKE THESE?
THEY'RE FOR BIG PEOPLE.
KIDS DON'T WEAR THEM.
YOU MEAN BIG PEOPLE.
IT'S NOT JUST THE
BROTHER AND SISTERS WHO
HAVE A PROBLEM
WITH SHARMAINE.
WHEN SHARMAINE WAS
YOUNGER SHE USED TO LISTEN
TO EVERYTHING I SAY.
NOW SHE'S REACHED
HER TEENS.
SHE WANTS TO
BE INDEPENDENT.
THEY'RE HORRIBLE.
YOU LIKE THIS,
DO YA.?
NO.
WELL, I DON'T WANT
TO GIVE HER THAT
INDEPENDENCE.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
BECAUSE I DON'T WANT TO
LET GO, BUT THERE ARE
MANY KIDS THAT ARE MAKING
MISTAKES IN LIFE AND I'M
TRYING TO PREVENT HER FROM
MAKING THOSE MISTAKES.
SHARMAINE.
NO WAY.
IT SHOWS ALL YOUR BELLY.
I HAD MY FIRST
CHILD AT 18.
THERE'S NO WAY ON THIS
EARTH SHARMAINE WILL BE
HAVING A CHILD AT 18.
YOU KNOW I WANT
SHARMAINE TO LIVE LIFE.
GET A GOOD EDUCATION.
UNTIL THEN, I WILL ALWAYS
BE DOWN ON HER LIKE A TON
OF BRICKS.
ME AND MY MOM DON'T
TALK ABOUT THAT MUCH,
WE ALWAYS ARGUE.
IT IS UNIVERSAL, IT
OCCURS ACROSS CULTURES.
DON'T KNOW WE
JUST DON'T GET ALONG
IT OCCURS IN
ALL CHILDREN.
I CAN'T WAIT TILL
SHE STOPS HASSLING ME.
IN FACT, I DON'T THINK
THAT ALL THE RESEARCH THAT
I HAVE EVER SEEN, THAT
I'VE SEEN A FAMILY WHO
DON'T HAVE ARGUMENTS
BETWEEN YOUNG TEENAGERS
AND THEIR PARENTS.
TODAY, SHOUTED AT..
TONIGHT GOT SHOUTED AT...
FOR REALLY NO
REASON AT ALL.
DON'T TALK FOR DAYS
BECAUSE YOU
SHOUT FOR NO REASON.
I DON'T SHOUT AT
YOU FOR NO REASON.
OF COURSE YOU DO.
HALF THE TIME SHE DON'T
KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON HERE.
SHE KNOWS THE ONE THING
THAT HAS HAPPENED.
SHE WILL SAY, "I DON'T
WANT TO HEAR YOUR SIDE."
MUSIC
THE WARNINGS OF PUBERTY
MAKES TEENAGE GIRLS
ESPECIALLY SENSITIVE.
CHANGING LEVELS OF
ESTROGEN MAKE THEIR MOOD
UNRELIABLE AND
EVEN AGGRESSIVE.
(MUSIC IN BACKGROUND)
THOUGH WITH GIRLS,
IT'S USUALLY
VERBAL AGGRESSION,
RATHER THAN
PHYSICAL VIOLENCE.
(MUSIC IN BACKGROUND)
ANY DAY IS
TIME FOR A ROW.
MY MOM SAYS TO ME,
I WAKE UP THINKING.
OKAY, ME
MOMS KNOWS TODAY.
I DON'T...
IT JUST IS MY
MOM SHOUTS FIRST.
I DON'T SHOUT BACK
I JUST SAY MY BIT.
YEAH YOUR JUST
LOOKING FOR AN ARGUMENT.
IF I'M UPSET, I START
SCREAMING AT MY BROTHERS
AND MY FAMILY.
SCREAM AT MY PARENTS
AND I KNOW THAT'S WRONG.
I DON'T KNOW.
I DON'T KNOW
WHERE WE STAND.
AND MY MOM DOESN'T
UNDERSTAND ME AT ALL.
OUR WHOLE LIVES WE DON'T
AGREE WITH EVERYBODY AND
CHILDREN HAVE TO LEARN
HOW TO NEGOTIATE
DISAGREEMENTS.
MY BELIEF IS THAT KIDS ARE
USING ARGUING WITH THEIR
PARENTS TO LEARN REALLY
IMPORTANT SOCIAL SKILLS
THAT THEY TAKE
ON TO LATER LIFE.
LOOK SMILE.
YOU CAN SEE IT.
WHAT BETTER PLACE TO
LEARN TO NEGOTIATE THAN IN
THE FAMILY.
IS THE SAFEST
PLACE TO ARGUE.
YOU CAN GET, YOU CAN
ARGUE WITH YOUR PARENTS,
YOU CAN WALK
OUT OF THE ROOM,
YOU CAN SCREAM AND THEY
ARE STILL GOING TO LOVE
YOU.
SHARMAINE
WHO'S IT TO YOU?
I DON'T KNOW.
MY LEGS HAVE
GOTTEN TALLER.
I THINK I'VE HAD A GROWTH
SPURT OR SOMETHING.
AND MY TUMMY HAS
CERTAINLY GOTTEN BIGGER.
I LOOK LIKE HOMER SIMPSON.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
HAPPENING WITH MY LEGS BUT
THEY JUST GOT REALLY
BUMPY UNDER THE SKIN.
LIKE MOMS AND THEIR
STRETCH MARKS.
I WANT TO HAVE
SOME SORT OF BUST.
THE TWINS ARE NOW
12 AND THEIR SURGING
HORMONES ARE FINALLY
CAUSING VISIBLE CHANGES.
AND IT'S NOT ALL WELCOME.
(MUSIC IN BACKGROUND)
LOVELY, ISN'T IT.
I LIKE THIS ONE.
THAT'S AN A CUP.
YOU NEED TO GROW INTO
THAT ONE JESSICA.
IT'S PERFECT.
GETTING A BRA HAS
MORE THAN PRACTICAL
SIGNIFICANCE.
MOST GIRLS LIKE
WEARING BRAS.
THEY THINKS IT"S
COOL, LIKE,
SOME GIRLS WEAR
THEM FOR NOTHING.
THEY DON'T GOT NOTHING
AND THEY JUST WEAR THEM
THEY WANT TO
BE GROWN-UP.
YEAH
THEY THINK THAT IF
YOUR NOT WEARING A BRA,
THEN YOU GET LEFT BEHIND.
MOST GIRLS IN MY
CLASS AREN'T VERY SELF
CONSCIOUS, AS I AM.
THEY ARE MORE
OPEN WITH IT.
THEY TALK ABOUT MORE
EASILY WITH THEIR FRIENDS.
SOME OF THEM MAY EVEN
TALK ABOUT IT WITH BOYS.
I'M SO EMBARRASSED
WHEN THEY DO THAT.
NOW SHE'S TWELVE,
REBECCA WANTS TO FIT IN.
SHE WANTS TO BE
LIKE THE OTHERS.
I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE
FUN FOR THE FIRST TIME TO
WEAR IT.
FUN.
I MEAN, WHY JESSICA.
JESSICA IS STILL
NOT VERY KEEN.
THAT'S TOO SMALL
IT'S VERY PRETTY.
BUT I WONDER IF IT'S GOT
ANY SUPPORT OR ANYTHING
LIKE THAT IN THERE.
I MEAN IT'S IMPORTANT.
YEAH, BUT YOU DON'T
REALLY NEED TO WEAR A BRA,
LIKE THE REST OF US.
IF YOU WANT
TO WEAR A BRA.
YOU JUST WEAR A BRA.
(LAUGHTER)
(MUSIC)
I WANT TO HAVE
SOME SORT OF BUST.
BUT NOT ENORMOUS ONES.
RIGHT?
THERE'S NOT
MUCH DIFFERENCE.
NO.
SHE'S 32 AND I'M 34.
JESSICA IS TEN MINUTES
YOUNGER THAN ME AND I'M
NOT SURPRISED THAT SHE'S
DEVELOPING SLOWER THAN
I AM.
(MUSIC)
FOR THE FIRST TIME THERE
IS A SIGNIFICANT PHYSICAL
DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE GIRLS.
WITH IDENTICAL
GENES THOUGH,
WHO WILL TAKE THE
NEXT STEP FIRST?
I KNOW ABOUT 3 GIRLS
WHO HAVE GOT THEIR PERIOD.
I ASKED MY MOM, BECAUSE
I WAS GETTING A BIT
WORRIED .
I DON'T WANT TO
START MY PERIOD ANYWAY.
CAUSE IT'S DISGUSTING.
ALL THE CHANGES OF
PUBERTY HAVE JUST ONE
PURPOSE, MAKING BABIES.
FOR IT TO HAPPEN, GIRLS
HAVE TO START THEIR
PERIODS.
IT'S AN EXTRAORDINARY
PROCESS.
AT THE TOP OF THE
SCREEN IS AN OVARY.
IT LOOKS ENORMOUS,
BUT IN REAL LIFE,
IT'S ONLY THE
SIZE OF A WALNUT.
INSIDE IS AN EGG.
ABOUT TO SET OFF UPON IT'S
DIFFICULT JOURNEY TO THE
WOMB.
FIRST, IT HAS TO CROSS A
GAP THOUSANDS OF TIMES ITS
OWN SIZE, FROM THE
OVARY TO THE TOP OF THE
FALLOPIAN TUBE BELOW.
IT'S CARRIED OVER IN A
COLUMN OF STICKY ALMOST
SEE-THROUGH JELLY.
SURPRISINGLY, IT
USUALLY MAKES IT.
THIS IS THE BEGINNING OF
THE POSSIBILITY OF NEW
LIFE.
(HEARTBEAT SOUNDS).
NEXT THE JOURNEY DOWN
THE FALLOPIAN TUBE,
IT'S ONLY 15 CENTIMETERS,
BUT IT TAKES 3 DAYS.
DURING THAT TIME, THE
WOMB ITSELF IS PREPARED.
THIS IS THE LINING
OF THE WOMB.
IT'S PACKED WITH
NOURISHMENT.
READY TO FEED A
FERTILIZED EGG,
AS IT GROWS INTO A BABY.
WHEN THE EGG IS NOT
FERTILIZED LINING AND EGG
TOGETHER ARE PAST AWAY
IN THE BLEEDING OF THE
PERIOD.
THIS AMAZING SEQUENCE OF
EVENTS TAKES PLACE 400
TIMES IN THE LIFE
OF A NORMAL FEMALE.
ALMOST ALL WOMEN REMEMBER
EXACTLY WHEN THEY STARTED
THEIR PERIODS.
BUT NOT MANY KNOW
WHAT THE TRIGGER WAS.
THE CRUCIAL
FACTOR IS WEIGHT.
VIRTUALLY ALL GIRLS
ARE ABOUT 48 KILOGRAMS,
17 PERCENT FAT
WHEN THEY START.
THAT'S BECAUSE THEY MUST
BE BIG ENOUGH TO NOURISH A
BABY.
EIGHTY YEARS AGO, WHEN
MANY GIRLS DID NOT HAVE
ENOUGH TO EAT THE AVERAGE
AGE OF THE FIRST PERIOD
WAS SIXTEEN.
AS NUTRITION IMPROVED,
THAT AGE DROPPED.
UNTIL IN THE 1940'S
IS WAS DOWN TO 13.
THESE DAYS IN SPITE OF THE
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF FOOD
PEOPLE EAT, THE AGE AT
WHICH PERIODS START IS
STILL THE SAME.
THIRTEEN YEARS OLD.
BUT BREAST DEVELOPMENT
IS COMING EARLIER.
THE TIME BETWEEN STARTING
PUBERTY AND STARTING
PERIODS HAS
DOUBLED IN LENGTH.
FROM EIGHTEEN MONTHS
TO THREE YEARS.
NOW A DAYS, PUBERTY IS
LASTING LONGER THAN EVER
BEFORE.
THE TWINS HAVE
JUST TURNED 13.
HOW CLOSE ARE THEY TO
THE CRUCIAL 48 KILOGRAMS,
7 ½ STONE.
HELLO, I'M JUST
ABOUT TO GO DOWNSTAIRS.
AND I'M ABOUT TO
GET ON THE SCALE.
TECHNICALLY, I'M NOT
AS BIG AS MY SISTER.
AND I'M 7 ½ STONE.
IT LOOKS LIKE THE TWINS
MIGHT START QUIT SOON.
BUT PERIODS AREN'T
THE END OF PUBERTY.
THERE THE BEGINNING OF
SOMETHING MUCH WORSE.
MUSIC
BACK AT THE WEB SITE
THEIR PREPARING FOR A
FEATURE THAT'S ALWAYS A
HIT WITH TEENAGE GIRLS.
ESPECIALLY THEIR
BIGGEST CONSUMERS,
THE 14 YEAR OLDS.
NICE SMILE.
THIS IS THE BEFORE SHOT.
WE DID A FEW
SHOTS THROUGHOUT.
A SINGLE MINDED
DEVOTION TO THEIR IMAGE IS
TYPICAL.
WHAT'S YOU RECKON?
YEAH, IT'S NICE.
GIRLS ARE NOT ONLY DRIVEN
BY WHAT'S IN FASHION.
WITH AN EVER
CHANGING BODY,
WHAT LOOKED
GOOD LAST MONTH,
MAYBE ENTIRELY
WRONG TODAY.
THE CURSE OF BEING 14
IS SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND
INSECURITY.
I LIKE THE TOP
AND THE TOP OVER IT.
I LIKE THE COLORS.
I THINK I WOULD
WEAR THE TOP.
UM, THE SHOES I'M NOT
REALLY SURE ABOUT.
THE LETTERS THAT COME TO
THE SITES AGONY COLUMN GO
TO EDITOR SIMONE NOCKS.
WE GET A LOT OF
LETTERS ABOUT DEVELOPMENT,
LIKE PERIODS, BREASTS,
WHEN ARE THEY
GOING TO HAPPEN?
"ALL MY FRIENDS HAVE
BREASTS, WHY DON'T I?
"IS THERE SOMETHING WRONG?
AM I TERRIBLY BROKEN?"
THAT KIND OF THING.
TEENAGE GIRLS ARE
THE MOST HARSH PEOPLE.
MOST HARSH SPECIES
ON THE PLANET EARTH.
I THINK THAT THEY SEE
THEMSELVES IN THE MIRROR
AND THEY LOOK
AT THE FLAWS.
WHEN I LOOK
IN THE MIRROR,
I THINK AND I SEE NICE
EYES, SPOTTY FACE,
AND A TERRIBLE NOSE.
I ABSOLUTELY HATE.
GIRLS BECOME SO ACUTELY
AWARE OF HOW THEY LOOK,
BECAUSE THEIR
BRAIN IS CHANGING.
LIKE THE BODY, THE
BRAIN DEVELOPS DURING
ADOLESCENCE.
AND THAT CHANGES THE
WAY TEENAGERS THINK.
THEY BECOME MORE AWARE
OF THE WORLD AROUND THEM.
AND THE FACT THAT OTHER
PEOPLE HAVE A POINT OF
VIEW.
ADD THAT TO AN
UNPREDICTABLE BODY AND THE
RESULT CAN BE PAINFUL
SELF CRITICISM.
THERE'S A BUMP
RIGHT THERE.
I DON'T LIKE MY EYEBROWS.
BIG CHERRY MOLDING NOSE.
IT WAS SMALL EARS,
RATHER THAN BIG EARS.
I HAVE VERY SMALL PORES.
OF COURSE SOME PROBLEMS
CANNOT BE AVOIDED.
I CAN'T REALLY SEE
ANYTHING EXCEPT FOR SPOTS.
I HAVE TWO BIG
SPOTS, SPOTTY FREAK.
SPOTTY FREAK.
A SPOTTY FREAK
ALL TEENAGERS
GET SPOTS.
THERE NOT CAUSED
BY STRESS,
BY CHOCOLATE.
AND THEY HAVE LITTLE TO
DO WITH HOW MUCH YOU WASH.
SPS ARE CAUSED BY
ALLERGY AND INFECTION.
THIS IS SKIN MAGNIFIED
A 1000 TIMES.
IT'S COVERED IN HAIR
FOLLICLES AND INSIDE
EVERYONE IS A GLAND THAT
PRODUCES GREASE CALLED
SEBUM.
A TEENAGERS FACE PRODUCES
HALF A LITTER OF SEBUM A
YEAR.
IT'S AN ALLERGIC REACTION
TO THE SURGING HORMONES.
AS IF THE SKIN IS TRYING
TO WASH THEM AWAY.
BUT ON ITS OWN, EVEN SEBUM
DOES NOT CAUSE SPOTS.
FOR THAT, YOU
NEED BACTERIA.
THEY LIVE ON
EVERYBODY'S SKIN.
BUT THEY DO NO DAMAGE
UNL THEY FIND THEIR WAY
INTO A STICKY AIRLESS
HAIR FOLLICLE.
AND THERE THEY THRIVE.
THE BODY SENDS WHITE CELLS
TO FIGHT THE BACTERIA OFF
AND THE COMBINATION
OF WHITE CELLS,
BACTERIA AND GREASE
CAUSES THE UNMISTAKABLE
INFLAMMATION OF THE SPOT.
WHERE DID MY BUT GO?
OH MY GOD.
THIS MIRROR IS SO AWESOME.
THE GIRLS BIGGEST
WORRY IS THEIR WEIGHT.
THE FACT THAT
SAD, BUT TRUE.
THESE GIRLS ARE TYPICAL OF
TEENAGERS WHO HAVE TAKEN A
PART IN DIFFERENT STUDIES.
SOME OF WHICH USED A
DISTORTING MIRROR LIKE
THIS.
THEY CAN MAKE THEIR
REFLECTIONS LOOK FATTER OR
THINNER BY TURNING THE
KNOB BEHIND THE MIRROR.
THE CHALLENGE IS TO
RECOIZE THEIR TRUE AND
DISTORTED SHAPE.
I LOOK ANOREXIC.
BIG.
NO THAT'S TO BIG.
GO BACK DOWN.
THERE.
OH NICE.
SURISINGLY, THEY
CAN JUDGE THEIR SIZE
QUITE ACCURATELY.
BUT ILE ONLY 25 PERCENT
OF TEENAGE GIRLS ARE
ACTUALLY OVERWEIGHT, 60
PERCENT OF TM THINK THEY
ARE.
I'M FAT.
LOOK AT ME.
THAT'S NASTY.
I'M ON A DIET.
IT'S BECAUSE EVERYONE
SAYS YOU NOT FAT.
WHAT SIZE ARE YOU.
I'M A SIZE 10.
I'M STILL FAT.
SMILE A BIT FOR ME.
PERFECT.
I THINK THE THING THAT
IT ALL COMES DOWN TO IS
THE BIG STRESS OF NOT
BEING ATTRACTIVE AND NOT
BEING PRETTY TO BOYS
AND NOT BEINATTRACTIVE
WIIN THEIR PRS.
SO REALLY ITS
NOT JUST FAT.
IT JUST SYMPTOMS OF
NOT FEELING ATTRACTI.
AS A TEENAGER,
ESPECIALLY AS A GIRL,
HOW YOU LOOK IS VERY OFF
LIMIT WITH POPULARITY.
MUSIC
AT THE END OF TWO
YEARS WITH OUR GIRLS,
WE SPENT MOST OF THE
BIG CHANGES OF PUBERTY.
WHAT DIFFERENCE HAVE
THEY MADE TO THEIR LIVES?
(MUSIC)
WE'VE COME A LONG,
LONG WAY TOGETHER.
THROUGH THE HARD
TIMES AND THE GOOD.
I HAVE TO
CELEBRATE YOU BABY.
I HAVE TO PRAISE
YOU LIKE I SHOULD.
REBECCA AND JESSICA
ARE NOW 13 ½ .
TWO YEARS AGO, THEY
STILL HAD IT ALL TO COME.
WELL, OBVIOUSLY
THEYRODUCED BREASTS.
AND PERIODS AND ALL
THAT STUFF, YUCKY STUFF.
MUSIC
WE HAVE JUST
GOT OUR PERIOD,
WHICH WE PROBABLY
HAVE TURNED INTO WOMEN.
IT MEANS, I'VE
LOST MY CHILDHOOD.
(LAUGHTER)
BACK OFF,
HOLD ON TO NINA.
I'M REALLY, REALLY
EMBARRASSED.
WHERE WAS I...
AHH, I'VE GOT A
REALLY BAD BELLY ACHES,
I'VE GOT BACKACHES,
I'M ON MY PERIOD,
I'VE GOT HEADACHES,
AND I FEEL SICK.
THERE CAN BE EIGHT YEARS
BETWEEN WHEN ANY TWO GIRLS
START THEIR PERIODS.
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE TWINS
WITH THEIR IDENTICAL
GENES?
WHICH OF THEM
STARTED FIRST?
IT WAS JESSICA,
THE YOUNGER ONE.
BUT REBECCA
WASN'T FAR BEHIND.
SHE STARTED THE
VERY NEXT DAY.
AND WAS IT AS BAD
AS THEY ALL THOUGHT.
I THOUGHT AS SOON AS
STARTED MY PERIOD I WOULD
BE CHANGED, BUT
I HAVEN'T REALLY.
I FEEL THE SAME.
I THOUGHT I'D GET MORE
MOODY AND LIKING BOYS.
BUT I HAVEN'T.
SOMETIMES I,
I FANCY BOYS,
BUT BOYS WON'T
LIKE KISSING.
IT JUST FREAKS ME OUT THEY
WAY PEOPLE HUGGING EACH
OTHER.
IT MAKES ME SICK.
AND LIKE, DON'T
LISTEN TO ADULTS,
AND THEY TALK ABOUT
SECONDARY SCHOOL.
CAUSE, I THOUGHT IT WAS
GOING TO BE REALLY BAD.
EVERY WHERE YOU GO IT'S
LIKE SOMETHING LIKE YOUR
GONNA GET BULLIED,
BUT YOU REALLY DON'T.
NOW WE ARE JUST
NORMAL TEENAGE GIRLS.
JUST HANGING
AROUND AND LAUGH.
OVER NOTHING AND STUFF.
IT'S GOT ME
IT'S GOT ME.
ALEX, IS STILL TAKING
THE MEDICINE TO STOP HER
DEVELOPMENT.
SO SHE'S NOT CHANGED MUCH.
AND HER MOM PLANS
TO KEEP IT THAT WAY,
UNTIL SHE'S A LEAST 13.
AT 14, CLAUDIA IS GOING
THROUGH THE TOUGHEST SET
OF EXAMS THAT SHE
HAS EVER FACED.
TWO YEARS AFTER THE PEEK
OF HER GROWTH SPURT.
WILL SHE BE ALRIGHT?
TODAY IT'S JAZZ.
JAZZ, UM, IT'S ALMOST
LIKE YOU KNOW EVERYTHING.
I'D JUST BE HAPPY IF I
COME OUT WITH ANYTHING
ABOVE 50.
ONE, TWO, THREE, AND
FOUR FIVE, SIX, SEVEN,
AND EIGHT.
I CAME OUT WITH 66 ½ .
MUSIC
TO COME OUT WITH 66.
WAS SOMETHING
I WAS REALLY,
REALLY PLEASED ABOUT
AND A HALF AND I CAME ON TOP.
(MUSIC)
THAT WAS SOMETHING
I WAS REALLY, REALLY,
REALLY HAPPY ABOUT.
CLAUDIA HAS REGAINED HER
BALANCE AND HER BODY IS
UNDER CONTROL.
WELL, MOST OF IT IS.
SEE THAT NICE
BIG KICK YOU DID.
I ONLY REALIZED THAT
YOU WANTED ME TO START.
HOW HIGH MY LEG GOT.
I ACTUALLY SMACKED
MYSELF IN THE FACE.
WHICH I ACTUALLY
SHOCKED MYSELF.
I WAS LIKE "WOW"
YOU CAN DO THAT!
YOU HAVE THE
FLEXIBILITY.
REMEMBER WHEN WE
FIRST MET SHARMAINE.
SHE WAS 14.
SHE HAS NO CONSIDERATION
FOR OTHERS WHATSOEVER.
I'M NOT PERFECT.
NOW SHARMAINE IS 16
AND SHE IS A REFORMED
CHARACTER.
NOW WHAT ARE YOU DOING?
SHE'S A COMPLETE
DIFFERENT CHILD FROM WHAT
SHE WAS.
SHE HAS REALLY,
REALLY CHANGED.
IF I'M IN MY BEDROOM,
SHE'LL COME IN AND SIT ON
THE BED AND WE
WILL HAVE A LAUGH.
SHE TELLS ME QUITE A LOT.
WE TALK ABOUT EVERYTHING.
AND I'M GLAD THAT SHE
CAN CONFIDE IN ME NOW.
BECAUSE I CAN OFFER
HER ME OPINION.
WE MIGHT NOT NECESSARILY
AGREE BUT WE WILL SIT DOWN
AND TALK ABOUT IT.
I RESPECT HER MORE NOW.
AND I THINK SHRESPECTS
MY OPINIONS AS WELL MORE
THAN SHE USE TO AND IT'S
JUST GETTING BETTER.
YES.
I BEAT YA.
I BEAT YA, SO WHAT
ARE YOU GOING TO SAY.
BEFORE IT WAS FUN TO
ANALYZE AND GET HER BACK.
BUT NOW I'LL JUST LEAVE
HER AND IF YOU DON'T
ANSWER BACK THE ARGUMENT
FINISHES QUICKER.
STEPHANIE, YOUR NEXT.
BUT THAT DOES NOT MEAN
PEACE HAS BROKEN OUT IN
SHARMAINE'S HOUSEHOLD.
RECENTLY, LITTLE
SISTER STEPH TURNED 13.
HER ATTITUDE STINKS..
SHARMAINE HAS IMPROVED
AND STEPHANIE HAS GONE THE
OPPOSITE WAY.
I'VE JUST GOT A
BAD ATTITUDE PROBLEM.
HOLD ON.
SHE'S SO CHEEKY
TO PEOPLE.
WHO DOES SHE REMIND
YOU OF, ARMAINE?
STEPHANIE'S NAUGHTY.
WHEN I HEAR STEPH, IT'S
LIKE HEARING MYSELF FROM
ABOUT TWO YEARS AGO.
STEPH'S A LITTLE ME NOW.
NAUGHTY.
LAUGHTER
MUSIC
OH, NO!